---
title: "WELDBook Intro"
---


Fundamental physics should be dead simple. if it doesn't seem to be,
then one can't help but wonder if there might be something simpler going
on, that gives rise to the apparent complexities.

There is a framework for understanding the fundamental physics of
electrodynamics (electrons and electromagnetic fields), based entirely
on interactive wave dynamics, that appears to be as simple as possible.
This framework is called Wave Electrodynamics (WELD), which is simply
the interaction between the electromagnetic field as described by
Maxwell's equations and electrons as described by Dirac's wave equation
for the electron -- the coupled [MaxwellDirac](/MaxwellDirac "wikilink")
system.

This book describes this framework and why it is arguably the simplest
model of fundamental physics that can potentially account for all of the
known phenomena. Clearly, if it were all this simple, the WELD framework
would be much more well known than it is, and you wouldn't be
encountering these ideas in this relatively obscure medium. There are
several seemingly insurmountable problems with this framework, that
prevent the vast majority of physicists from even considering it. Thus,
another important objective of this book is addressing these concerns,
to make it clear that this framework is viable, if not (yet)
definitively more accurate than the prevailing more complex (and frankly
incomprehensible) accepted model (the *standard model* of physics, based
on standard interpretations of quantum mechanics (QM)).

In this introduction, the central philosophical foundations of the
approach are presented. The core idea is that nature is actually doing
something in particular to produce the reality we observe. This is
apparently a surprisingly difficult notion for many to understand.
Physicists are used to switching between many different mathematical
representations of a problem to calculate predictions for different
experimental outcomes. And a foundational framework of physics,
relativity, is based on the notion that any reference frame is as good
as any other for describing physics -- there is no privileged
description of nature, and you have to do some sophisticated mathematics
to transform between these different reference frames. In humanist
terms, physicists are surprisingly like cultural relativists.

# Calculational Tools vs. Physical Models

To provide a framework for understanding different approaches to
physics, it is critical to distinguish between *calculational tools* and
*physical models*. Calculational tools are mathematical frameworks for
computing results of experiments in the most direct and efficient way
possible, whereas physical models attempt to describe physical
mechanisms in a way that nature might plausibly actually work.
